**Statement of Teaching Philosophy**

As a prison educator with a background in public history, my teaching philosophy is rooted in my longstanding commitments to education as a public service and learning as a collaborative process. As a historian, I pair course content with critical thinking skills in all my courses, from broad survey classes and introductory college writing classes to upper-division electives. In each of these courses, I teach primary source literacy as a skill that transcends disciplinary boundaries and empowers students to navigate our increasingly complex information landscape.  

Having worked previously in multiple museums and historic houses, I bring students into the archive, the museum, and the local community both physically and digitally. For example, in my first-year writing seminar, “Landscapes of Death,” students visited, mapped, and researched over a dozen off-campus commemorative sites. In addition to physically probing beyond the insular bubble around the university campus, students researched coverage of the memorials in digital newspaper archives. The class provided them with a productive, intellectual space to scrutinize the politics of memorialization in terms of trauma, erasure, and resistance. After the course, students reported an increased awareness of the materiality of commemorative practices, greater comfort independently moving around the city, and a new appreciation for their own proximal relationship to the past. When designing “Landscapes of Death,” I wanted to thoughtfully reassess how I introduced primary sources in the classroom to freshmen and non-majors. I developed an IRB-approved study, inspired by the scaffolding approach articulated by Anne Bahde in 2013.[^1]  As a result of this research and subsequent findings, I integrated collaborative annotation into all my courses (using Hypothes.is for my Cornell classes and innovating analogue alternatives in the prison classroom).[^2]

In my courses I invite students to reimagine class participation as a civic duty. I explain that as a class, we constitute a community of individuals collectively pursuing intellectual growth. In this context, participation takes many forms, such as exit tickets, peer-review, and small-group discussions. My efforts to reintroduce learning as a collaborative process also include collectively drafting a class conduct contract in the first week of class. This civics based approach to education also lies at the heart of my digital humanities instruction. Through scholarly crowdsourcing initiatives, I engage undergraduate students in conversations about the creation and transmission of knowledge, citational ethics, and public scholarship. For instance, my students contributed to making new Black history archival sources publicly available as part of the annual [Douglass Day](https://douglassday.org/) transcribe-a-thon. Students acquired transferrable digital skills during this event and a subsequent Wikipedia Edit-a-thon, and reflected on the racial and gender disparities in historical sources and corresponding scholarship. Citizen science and humanities projects such as these empower students as members of the scholarly community. 

The way that I teach citation practices in my courses is aligned with my commitment to diversity and inclusion in the academy. In addition to proper attribution as a matter of intellectual honesty, movements like Christen A. Smith’s [#CiteBlackWomen](https://www.citeblackwomencollective.org/) reveals that our individual citation practices can either replicate or resist existing systems of power. As a historian of the South Asia and the Islamic world, I ask questions in the classroom about the role of sources and attribution in knowledge production under colonialism—and the construction of categories like “East” and “West,” “Islamic world” or “Muslim world.” 

My students learn to trace citations as an exercise in both the skill itself and learning about the evolution of ideas. In order to accommodate virtual instruction when my first-year writing seminar had to pivot online in 2020, I redesigned a citation tracing scavenger hunt to be entirely digital. The revised assignment required students navigate from a particular Wikipedia article through multiple secondary and tertiary sources, and then answer questions about sourcing, summarization, and access. Since my incarcerated students cannot access the internet, I have developed analog alternatives in which I bring in a selection of both primary and secondary sources cited in a scholarly article. The students then work in pairs to answer questions and reflect on the practice of knowledge production. 

When I began teaching my own courses through the [Cornell Prison Education Program](https://cpep.cornell.edu/), I realized how an instructor’s choice in writing prompts could set up students to succeed or fail. The limitations of the prison classroom forces instructors to innovate. My incarcerated students only have access to the course materials issued on the first day of class (and which have already survived the prison censorship process 3 months prior). They can neither reach me via email or office hours with questions, nor do I have any means of communicating with them outside of the classroom to provide clarifications. I wanted to develop essay prompts that invite creativity, discourage regurgitation, and necessitate that students synthesize material across multiple units. At the same time, I had to assign a prompt for which students could be reasonably prepared to complete based on what we had done in class. For one take-home exam in a Western Civilization II course, I assigned the following prompt:  
> John Locke has been magically brought back to life and finds himself in China (and speaking Chinese) during the Second Opium War. What position does he take on the conflict and British trade policy at the time, and why? You may write your answer in any prose format as long as you use specific examples from the readings about John Locke, the Enlightenment, imperial expansion, and European trade with Asia.  

My students took advantage of the opportunity to be imaginative by producing short stories and traditional essays, all of which cited concrete course content. One memorable and well crafted submission took the form of a letter from this hypothetical John Locke to Queen Victoria, formatted as primary source in an edited volume with explanatory footnotes and all.

In order to develop as a teacher-scholar, I attended the 2018 [Reacting to the Past](https://reacting.barnard.edu/) (RTTP) Annual Faculty Institute at Barnard College with the support of a grant from [Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning](https://futurefaculty.cornell.edu/) (CIRTL). The institute programming impressed me in how the role-play games accommodated ahistorical possibilities, while still ensuring that the students learned the actual history without micromanagement. In early 2020, I successfully implemented the RTTP micro-game “Athens Besieged” in a Western Civilization I prison class at Cayuga Correctional Facility.

[^1]:  Anne Bahde, “The History Labs: Integrating Primary Source Literacy Skills into a History Survey Course,” _Journal of Archival Organization_ 11, no. 3–4 (December 1, 2013): 175–204, https://doi.org/10.1080/15332748.2013.951254
[^2]: M. Brielle Harbin, “Collaborative Note-Taking: A Tool for Creating a More Inclusive College Classroom,” _College Teaching_ 68, no. 4 (2020): 214–20, https://doi.org/10.1080/87567555.2020.1786664.
